#summary Deleting records from your database tables.
#labels chapter,0.8

Deleting records in Wheels is simple. If you have fetched an object you can just call its [delete delete()] method. If you don't have any callbacks specified for the class all that will happen is that the record will be deleted from the table and `true` will be returned.

If you have callbacks however, this is what happens:

First, all methods registered to be run before a delete happens (these are registered using a [beforeDelete beforeDelete()] call from the `init` function) will be executed (if any exist). If these return `true` Wheels will proceed and delete the record from the table. If `false` is returned from the callback code processing will return to your code without the record being deleted (`false` is returned to you in this case). If the record was deleted the _after delete_ callback code is executed and whatever that code returns will be returned to you (you should make all your callbacks return `true` or `false`).

If you're unfamiliar with the concept of callbacks you can read about them in the [ObjectCallbacks Object Callbacks] chapter.

==Example of Deleting a Record==

Here's a simple example of fetching a record from the database and then deleting it.

{{{
<cfset aPost = model("post").findById(33)>
<cfset aPost.delete()>
}}}

There are also three class level delete methods available, [deleteById deleteById()], [deleteOne deleteOne()] and [deleteAll deleteAll()]. These function similarly to the class level methods for updating (which you can read more about in [UpdatingRecords Updating Records]).