#summary Make your model calls more readable by using dynamic finders.
#labels chapter,0.9.1,published-dev

With the recent introduction of `onMissingMethod` in !ColdFusion 8 (Thanks, Adobe!), we have been able to port over the concept of _dynamic finders_ from Rails to Wheels.

The concept is simple. Instead of using arguments to tell Wheels what you want to do, you can use a dynamically-named method.

For example, the following code:

{{{
<cfset me = model("user").findOne(where="email='my@myself.com'")>
}}}

Can also be written as:

{{{
<cfset me = model("user").findOneByEmail("my@myself.com")>
}}}

Through the power of `onMissingMethod`, Wheels will parse the method name and figure out that the value supplied is supposed to be matched against the `email` column.

==Dynamic Finders Involving More than One Column==

You can take this one step further by using code such as:

{{{
<cfset me = model("user").findOneByUserNameAndPassword("bob,pass")>
}}}

In this case, Wheels will split the method name on the `And` part and determine that you want to find the record where the `username` column is "bob" and the `password` column is "pass".

When you are passing in two values, make special note of the fact that they should be passed in as a list to *one* argument and not as two separate arguments.

In the examples above, we've used the [findOne findOne()] method, but you can use the same approach on a [findAll findAll()] method as well.

==Passing in Other Finder Parameters==

In the background, these dynamically-named methods just pass along execution to [findOne findOne()] or [findAll findAll()]. This means that you can also pass in any arguments that are accepted by those two methods.

The below code, for example, is perfectly valid:

{{{
<cfset users = model("user").findAllByState(value="NY", order="name", page=3)>
}}}

When passing in multiple arguments like above, it is a good idea to start naming them instead of relying on the order of the arguments. When doing so, you need to name the argument `value` or `values` (preferably using `values` when calling an "And" type dynamic finder).

==Avoid the Word "and" in Database Column Names==

Keep in mind that this dynamic method calling will break down completely if you ever name a column `firstAndLastName` or something similar because Wheels will then split the method name incorrectly. So, avoid using "And" in the column name if you plan on taking advantage of dynamically-named finder methods.