#summary Wheels goes a long way to help you develop your applications faster and better, but there are still some helper functions that just won't fit into a certain category. Therefore, here are the miscellaneous helper functions.
#labels chapter,0.9.1

These functions, can help you out in those tricky little tasks that needs to be perform in the front-end of your web applicaitons. Although they are called miscellaneous, they are in fact categorized into four (4) simple categories:

 * Date Helpers
 * Non Model Form Helpers
 * Media Helpers
 * Text Helpers

Let's learn more about these categories:

==Date Helpers==

I don't know about you, but date handling have always been a tedious task for me, thankfully Wheels does a pretty good job at simplifying this not so fun task and makes it a lot simpler for you.

Let's say that you have a comment section in your application, which shows the title, comment and time of its publication. In the old days your code will look something like this:

{{{
<cfoutput query="comments">
  <div class="comment-header">#title# - #DateFormat(createdAt)#</div>
  <div class="comment">#comment#</div>
</cfoutput>
}}}

That works, but it's not that appealing. The date will be formated in a way that it's not that meaningful to the end-user. Instead of `4/27/2009` it would be better to display `a few minutes ago` or `2 hours ago`, something of that nature. This can be accomplished with Wheels with the little help of, you guessed it, a date helper function.

{{{
<cfoutput query="comments">
  <div class="comment-header">#title# - #timeAgoInWords(createdAt)#</div>
  <div class="comment">#comment#</div>
</cfoutput>
}}}

With that minimal change, you have a prettier presentation for your end-users, and most important of all, it didn't required you to do anything fancy in your code.

==Non Model Form Helpers==

You have heard of the [FormHelpersandShowingErrors Form Helpers] by now, and how they are useful at data entry in your application. But you haven't met the whole gang yet, for each model form helper there is a non model form helper to back you up while you are coding those tedious form views.
These form helpers are useful in those tasks where model form helpers come short. To illustrate this, let's jump right into some examples:

{{{
<cfoutput>
  #startFormTag(action="sendFeedback")#
    #textFieldTag(label="First Name", name="profile", prepend="<div>", append="</div>")#
    #textFieldTag(label="Last Name", name="profile", prepend="<div>", append="</div>")#
    #textAreaTag(label="Comment", name="department", prepend="<div>", append="</div>")#
    #submitTag(prepend="<div>", append="</div>")#
  #endFormTag()#
</cfoutput>
}}}

The previous example is a basic feedback form in an hypothetical `public` controller. It's most likely that this form won't have a model (database table) to back up the data, so non model helpers are a great approach to accomplish this.  

==Media Helpers==

Working with media is also a walk in the park with Wheels. Let's jump into two (2) quick examples:

{{{
<!--- layout.cfm --->
<cfoutput>
  #stylesheetIncludeTag(source="main", media="all")#
</cfoutput>
}}}

Do you see what we did there? No more struggling to remember what was that line of HTML that includes CSS files into your page, a single function in Wheels will look into the `stylesheets` folders and include the CSS file for you.

But how about the other folders? Well you can do this with the `images` and `javascript` folders as well. Let's jump into some more code to see an example on how to include an image into your application.

{{{
<cfoutput>
  #imageTag(source="logo.png")#
</cfoutput>
}}}

How about that? not only this is less typing, but by calling this function Wheels will set the `width`, `height` and `alt` attributes automatically for you and cache the image for later use in your application.

==Text Helpers==

We have covered by now a little bit of ground, but we are still missing one of the categories, let's not forget about text helpers as well. To illustrate this, let's see a piece of code that include two (2) of the Text Helpers in a little search result page.

{{{
<cfoutput>
  #highlight(text="You searched for: Wheels", phrases="Wheels")# returned #pluralize(word="record", count=searchResults.recordCount)#.
</cfoutput>
}}}

That piece of code will highlight all occurances of "Wheels" and will pluralize the word "record" to "records" if the result set is greater than 1. How about them apples? no if statements, no extra lines, no nothing.