#summary Hide your primary key values from nosy users.
#labels chapter,1.0

_*Note:* This wiki contains "bleeding edge" documentation, which may reflect a future version of Wheels. Entries in the wiki may also be incomplete and unedited. For the "official" documentation, please visit [http://www.cfwheels.com/docs Official ColdFusion on Wheels Documentation]._

The Wheels convention of using primary key values when building links (as in the `key` argument to [linkTo linkTo()] for example) will lead to them being exposed to anyone interested in the browser's URL bar. Using the built-in URL obfuscation functionality in Wheels, you can hide the real primary key values from nosy users.

==What URL Obfuscation Does==

When URL obfuscation is turned off (which is the default setting in Wheels), this is how a lot of your URLs will end up looking:

{{{
http://localhost/user/profile/99
}}}

Here, `99` is the primary key value of a record in your `users` table.

After enabling URL obfuscation, this is how those URLs will look instead:

{{{
http://localhost/user/profile/b7ab9a50
}}}

The value `99` has now been obfuscated by Wheels to `b7ab9a50`. This makes it harder for nosy users to substitute the value to see how many records are in your `users` table, to name just one example.

==How to Use It==

To turn on URL obfuscation, all you have to do is set `application.settings.obfuscateURLs` to `true` in the `config/settings.cfm` file.

Once you do that, Wheels will handle everything else. Obviously, the main things Wheels does is obfuscate the primary key value when using the [linkTo linkTo()] function and deobfuscate it on the receiving end. Wheels will also obfuscate all other params sent in to [linkTo linkTo()] as well as any value in a form sent using a `get` request.

In some circumstances, you will need to obfuscate and deobfuscate values yourself if you link to pages without using the [linkTo linkTo()] function, for example. In these cases, you can use the [obfuscateParam obfuscateParam()] and [deObfuscateParam deObfuscateParam()] functions to do the job for you.

==Is This Really Secure?==

No, this is not meant to add a high level of security to your application. It just obfuscates the values, making casual observation harder. It does not encrypt values, so keep that in mind when using this approach.