#summary Showing content to the user.
#labels chapter,1.0

_*Note:* This wiki contains "bleeding edge" documentation, which may reflect a future version of Wheels. Entries in the wiki may also be incomplete and unedited. For the "official" documentation, please visit [http://www.cfwheels.com/docs Official ColdFusion on Wheels Documentation]._

A big part of a controller's task is to respond to the user. In Wheels you can respond to the user in three different ways:

 * Displaying content
 * Redirecting to another URL
 * Sending a file

You can only respond once per request. If you do not explicitly call any of the response functions ([renderPage renderPage()], [sendFile sendFile()] etc) then Wheels will assume that you want to show the view for the current controller and action and do it for you.

This chapter covers the first method listed above - displaying content. The chapters about [RedirectingUsers Redirecting Users] and [SendingFiles Sending Files] cover the other two response methods.

==Rendering a Page==

This is the most common way of responding to the user. It's done with the [renderPage renderPage()] function but most often you probably won't call it yourself and instead let Wheels do it for you. Sometimes you will want to call it though and specify to show a view page for a controller/action other than the current one. One common technique for handling a form submission for example is to show the view page for the controller/action that has the form (as opposed to the one that just handles the form and redirects on success). When doing this it's very important to keep in mind that [renderPage renderPage()] will not run the *code* for the controller's action, all it does is include the view page for it.

You also need to call [renderPage renderPage()] explicitly if you wish to cache the response or use a different layout than the default one.

==Rendering a Partial==

This is done with the [renderPartial renderPartial()] function. It's most often used with AJAX requests that are meant to update only parts of a page.

==Rendering Nothing==

Sometimes you don't need to return anything at all to the browser. Perhaps you've made an AJAX request that does not require a response or executed a scheduled task that no end user sees the results of. In these cases you can use the [renderNothing renderNothing()] function to tell Wheels to just render an empty page to the browser.

==Rendering Text==

This is done with the [renderText renderText()] function. It just returns the text you specify. In reality it is rarely used but could be useful as a response to AJAX requests sometimes.

==Rendering to a Variable==

Normally when you call any of the rendering functions the result is stored inside an internal Wheels variable and then that is outputted to the browser at the end of the request. Sometimes you want to do something else with it though and this is where [renderPageToString renderPageToString()] comes in handy. It will return the result to you instead of placing it internally.

==Caching the Response==

Two of the functions listed above are capable of caching the content for you; [renderPage renderPage()] and [renderPartial renderPartial()]. Just pass in `cache=true` (to use the default cache time set in `config/settings.cfm`) or `cache=x` where `x` is the number of minutes you want to cache the content for. Keep in mind that this caching respects the global setting set for it in your configuration files so normally no pages will be cached when in design or development mode.

We cover caching in greater detail in the [Caching Caching] chapter.

==Using a Layout==

The [renderPage renderPage()] function (and naturally the [renderPageToString renderPageToString()] as well) accepts an argument named `layout`. Using this you can wrap your content with common header / footer style code. This is such an important concept though so we'll cover all the details of it in the chapter called [UsingLayouts Using Layouts].