#summary An easy way to keep deleted data in your database.
#labels chapter,0.8

_*Note:* This wiki contains "bleeding edge" documentation, which may reflect a future version of Wheels. Entries in the wiki may also be incomplete and unedited. For the "official" documentation, please visit [http://www.cfwheels.com/docs Official ColdFusion on Wheels Documentation]._

"Soft delete" in database lingo means that you set a flag on an existing table that indicates that a record has been deleted, instead of actually deleting the record.

==How to Use Soft Deletion==

If you create a new date column (the column type will depend on your database vendor, but usually you want to use `date`, `datetime`, or `timestamp`) on a table and name it `deletedAt`, Wheels will automagically start using it to record soft deletes.

Without the soft delete in place, a [delete delete()] call on an object will delete the record from the table using a `DELETE` statement. With the soft delete in place, an `UPDATE` statement is sent instead (that sets the `deletedAt` field to the current time).

Of course, all other Wheels functions are smart enough to respect this. So if you use a [findAll findAll()] function, for example, it will not return any record that has a value set in the `deletedAt` field.

What this all means is that you're given a convenient way to keep deleted data in your database forever, while having your application function as if the data is not there.

Obviously, if you have any manual queries in your application, you'll need to remember to add `deletedAt IS NULL` to the `WHERE` part of your SQL statements.