#summary Our listing of steps to take while upgrading your Wheels application from 0.7 to 0.8.
#labels 0.8.3,chapter

The easiest way to upgrade is to setup an empty website, deploy a fresh copy of Wheels 0.8, and then transfer your application code to it. When transferring, please make note of the following changes and make the appropriate changes to your code.

*Note:* To accompany the newest 0.8.3 release, we've highlighted the changes that are affected by that release.

==Supported System Changes==

 * Oracle 10g or later is now supported.
 * *0.8.3:* Railo Express 3.0 is now supported.

==File System Changes==

 * The `controller` folder has been changed to `controllers`.
 * The `model` folder has been changed to `models`.
 * The `view` folder has been changed to `views`.
 * Rename all of your CFCs in `models` and `controllers` to UpperCamelCase. So `controller.cfc` will become `Controller.cfc`, `adminUser.cfc` will become `AdminUser.cfc`, and so on.
 * All images must now be stored in the `images` folder, files in the `files` folder, JavaScript files in the `javascripts` folder, and CSS files in the `stylesheets` folder off of the root. (In 0.7, you were able to specify the paths yourself.)

==Database Structure Changes==

  * `deletedOn`, `updatedOn`, and `createdOn` are no longer available as auto-generated fields. Please change the names to `deletedAt`, `updatedAt`, and `createdAt` instead to get similar functionality, and make sure that they are of type `datetime`, `timestamp`, or equivalent.

==CFML Code Changes==

===Config Code===

 * *0.8.3:* There have been a few lines added to and removed from the files stored in the `config` folder. We recommend copying any unique settings that you have from your old copy to the new Wheels config files.

===Model Code===

 * *0.8.3:* A model file is now optional if you don't need to associate it with other models or add any additional business logic.
 * *0.8.3:* `findById()` is now called `findByKey()`. Additionally, its `id` argument is now named `key` instead. For composite keys, this argument will accept a comma-delimited list.
 * *0.8.3:* `findByKey()` also accepts an object for the `key` argument, in which case it will automatically extract the keys from it for use in the query.
 * When using a model's `findByKey()` and `findOne()` functions, the `found` property is no longer available. Instead, we've adopted the "Rails way" of doing this, which involves the function throwing an error of type "Wheels.RecordNotFound" if the record was not found. Instead, use a `cftry`/`cfcatch` block to catch the error.
 * A model's `errorsOn()` function now always returns an array, even if there are no errors on the field. When there are errors for the field, the array elements will contain a `struct` with `name`, `fieldName`, and `message` elements.
 * The way callbacks are created has changed. There is now a method for each callback event (`beforeValidation()`, `beforeValidationOnCreate()`, etc.) that should be called from your model's `init()` method. These methods take a single argument: the method within your model that should be invoked during the callback event. See the chapter on ObjectCallbacks for an example.

===View Code===

 * *0.8.3:* In `linkTo()`, the `id` argument is now called `key`. It now accepts a comma-delimited list in the case of composite keys.
 * *0.8.3:* The `linkTo()` function also accepts an object for the `key` argument, in which case it will automatically extract the keys from it for use in the hyperlink.

===Controller Code===

 * *0.8.3:* Multiple-word controllers and actions are now word-delimited by hyphens in the URL. For example, if your controller is called `SiteAdmin` and the action is called `editLayout`, the URL to access that action would be `http://www.domain.com/site-admin/edit-layout`.

===URL/Routing===

 * *0.8.3:* The default route for Wheels has changed from `[controller]/[action]/[id]` to `[controller]/[action]/[key]`. This is to support composite keys. The `params.id` value will now only be available as `params.key`.
 * *0.8.3:* You can now pass along composite keys in the URL bar. Delimit multiple keys with a comma. (If you want to use this feature, then you can't have a comma in the key value itself).