#summary Making URLs prettier using URL rewriting.
#labels chapter,0.9.1

URL rewriting is a completely optional feature of Wheels, and all it does is get rid of the `index.cfm` part of the URL.

For example, with URL rewriting off, a URL in your application could look like this:

{{{
http://localhost/index.cfm/blog/new
}}}

After turning on URL rewriting, it would look like this:

{{{
http://localhost/blog/new
}}}

Combine this with the routing functionality of Wheels, and you get the capablility of creating some really human-friendly (easier to remember, say over the phone, etc.) and search engine friendly URLs (easier to crawl, higher !PageRank, etc.).

Unfortunately, if you're running your Wheels powered site in a sub folder of another site you will not be able to turn on URL rewriting (at least not without making some custom changes to your rewrite rules), so we recommend running the Wheels site as a stand-alone site whenever possible. If you've met this one requirement and want the shortest and prettiest URLs possible, then just follow the instructions below.

==Instructions for Apache==

 # Check that the Apache `rewrite_module` has been loaded by ensuring there is no pound signs before the line that says `LoadModule rewrite_module modules/mod_rewrite.so` in the `httpd.conf` file.
 # Make sure that Apache has permission to load the rewrite rules from the `.htaccess` file in the web root. This is done by setting `AllowOverride` to `All` under the `Directory` section corresponding to the website you plan on using Wheels on (still inside the `httpd.conf` file).

That should be it, in fact, on some Apache setups you don't have to do anything at all. Apache will pick up and use the rewrite rules specified in the `.htaccess` file on server start-up.

==Instructions for IIS==

Unfortunately, there is no built-in URL rewriting mechanism in IIS, so getting Wheels working with pretty URLs is a little more complicated than with Apache. Here's what you do:

 # Download "Ionic's ISAPI Rewrite Filter" from [http://cheeso.members.winisp.net/IIRF.aspx].
 # Unzip the file and put the `.dll` file in the root of your website. (It needs to be in the same folder as the `IsapiRewrite4.ini` file.)
 # To enable the rewrite filter in IIS, click on `Properties` for your website, then go to the `ISAPI Filters` tab and click the `Add...` button.
 # Type in anything you want as the `Filter Name` and point the `Executable` to the `IsapiRewrite4.dll` file.

Now restart your web server and enjoy those fancy new URLs. :)