# Getting Started

By far the quickest way to get started with CFWheels is via [CommandBox](https://www.ortussolutions.com/products/commandbox). CommandBox brings a whole host of command line capability to the CFML developer. It allows you to write scripts that can be executed at the command line written entirely in CFML. It allows you to start a CFML server from any directory on your machine and wire up the code in that directory as the web root of the server. What's more is, those servers can be either Lucee servers or Adobe ColdFusion servers. You can even specify what version of each server to launch. Lastly, CommandBox is a package manager for CFML. That means you can take some CFML code and package it up into a module, host it on ForgeBox.io, and make it available to other CFML developers. In fact we make extensive use of these capabilities to distribute CFWheels plugins and templates. More on that later.

One module that we have created is a module that extends CommandBox itself with commands and features specific to the CFWheels framework. The CFWheels CLI module for CommandBox is modeled after the Ruby on Rails CLI module and gives similar capabilities to the CFWheels developer. \[block:api-header] { "type": "basic", "title": "Install Commandbox" } \[/block] The first step is to get [CommandBox](https://www.ortussolutions.com/products/commandbox) downloaded and running. CommandBox is available for Windows, Mac & Linux, and can be installed manually or using one of the respective package managers for each OS. You can use [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org) on Windows, [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on MacOS, or Yum/Apt on Linux depending on your flavor of Linux. Please follow the instructions on how to install CommandBox on your particular operating system. At the end of the installation process you want to make sure the `box` command is part of your system path so you can call the command from any directory on your system. \[block:callout] { "type": "warning", "title": "Homebrew on Apple Silicon Macs", "body": "As of this writing, the Homebrew install of CommandBox is broken on Macs with Apple Silicon chipsets. This has to due with native implementations of Java for the ARM64 architecture and Lucee more than CommandBox and CFWheels but at the end of the day, you may need to resort to the manual installation method of the CommandBox version packaged with the JRE instead of installing it via Homebrew until this issues get resolved." } \[/block] Once installed, you can either double-click on the `box` executable which opens the CommandBox shell window, or run `box` from a CMD window in Windows, Terminal window in MacOS, or shell prompt on a Linux server. Sometimes you only want to call a single CommandBox command and don't need to launch a whole CommandBox shell window to do that, for these instances you can call the CommandBox command directly from your default system terminal window by prefixing the command with the `box` prefix.

So to run the CommandBox `version` command you could run: \[block:code] { "codes": \[ { "code": "box version", "language": "shell", "name": "Shell" } ] } \[/block] Or you could launch the CommandBox shell and then type: \[block:code] { "codes": \[ { "code": "version", "language": "shell", "name": "CommandBox" } ] } \[/block] This is a good concept to grasp, cause depending on your workflow, you may find it easier to do one versus the other. Most of the commands you will see in these CLI guides will assume that you are entering the command in the actual CommandBox shell so the `box` prefix is left off. \[block:api-header] { "type": "basic", "title": "Install the cfwheels-cli module" } \[/block] Okay, now that we have CommandBox installed, let's add the CFWheels CLI module. \[block:code] { "codes": \[ { "code": "install cfwheels-cli", "language": "shell", "name": "CommandBox" } ] } \[/block] Installing this module will add a number of commands to your default CommandBox installation. All of these commands are prefixed by the `wheels` name space. There are commands to create a brand new CFWheels application or scaffold out sections of your application. We'll see some of these commands in action momentarily. \[block:api-header] { "type": "basic", "title": "Start a new Application" } \[/block] Now that we have CommandBox installed and extended it with the CFWheels CLI module, let's start our first CFWheels app from the command line. We'll look at the simplest method for creating a CFWheels app and starting our development server. \[block:code] { "codes": \[ { "code": "wheels generate app myApp\nserver start", "language": "shell", "name": "CommandBox" } ] } \[/block]

\[block:image] { "images": \[ { "image": \[ "https://files.readme.io/73279f3-wheels\_generate\_app\_larger.gif", "wheels generate app larger.gif", 600, 295, "#1c1a1c" ] } ] } \[/block] A few minutes after submitting the above commands a new browser window should open up and display the default CFWheels congratulations screen. \[block:image] { "images": \[ { "image": \[ "https://files.readme.io/76e1179-Screen\_Shot\_2022-02-08\_at\_9.12.06\_AM.png", "Screen Shot 2022-02-08 at 9.12.06 AM.png", 1221, 930, "#f5f5f6" ], "sizing": "full" } ] } \[/block] So what just happened? Since we didn't supply many parameters to the `wheels generate app` command, it used default values for most of its parameters and downloaded our Base template (cfwheels-template-base) from ForgeBox.io, then downloaded the framework itself (cfwheels-core) from ForgeBox.io and placed it int he wheels directory, then configured the application name and reload password, and started a Lucee server on a random port. \[block:callout] { "type": "info", "title": "A Word About Command Aliases", "body": "CommandBox commands have the capability to be called by multiple names or aliases. The command above `wheels generate app` can also be initiated by typing `wheels g app`. In fact `g` is an alias for `generate` so wherever you see a command in the CLI documentation that has `generate` in it you can substitute `g` instead. \n\nIn addition to shortening `generate` to `g`, aliases can completely change the name space as well. A command that you haven't seen yet is the `wheels generate app-wizard` command. This command guides the user through a series of menu options, building up all the parameters needed to customize the start of a new CFWheels project. You're likely to use the wizard when starting a new CFWheels application so it's good to become familiar with it. This command has the normal alias referenced above at `wheels g app-wizard` but it also has an additional alias at `wheels new` which is the command more prevalent in the Rails community. So the three commands `wheels generate app-wizard`, `wheels g app-wizard`, and `wheels new` all call the same functionality which guides the user though a set of menus, collecting details on how to configure the desired app. Once all the parameters have been gathered, this command actually calls the `wheels generate app` command to create the actual CFWheels application." } \[/block] This getting started guide has taken you from the very beginning and gotten you to the point where you can go into any empty directory on your local development machine and start a CFWheels project by issuing a couple of CLI commands. In later guides we'll explore these options further and see what else the CLI can do for us.
